[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: was Article 231, also known as the War Guilt Clause. This required Germany to disarm,
[Amit Varma]: to give up some territory, and most importantly, to pay reparations to some of the winners of the
[Amit Varma]: war for the damage it had caused. The total cost of these reparations was later estimated
[Amit Varma]: to be 132 billion marks, which would come to 442 billion US dollars today. Germany at the time
[Amit Varma]: simply didn't have that kind of money, and in desperation resorted to just printing money.
[Amit Varma]: Now printing money can lead to inflation, which is basically a tax on the poor. Germany printed
[Amit Varma]: so much of it that it led to hyperinflation, which was equivalent to waging war on their own people.
[Amit Varma]: The unrest that this caused led to the rise of Nazism, Adolf Hitler coming to power in the 1930s,
[Amit Varma]: and eventually to World War II. Talk of unintended consequences.
[Amit Varma]: Now this was not something that was unforeseen at the time. The economist John Maynard Keynes
[Amit Varma]: wrote a book called The Economic Consequences of the Peace, which pointed out the reasons why
[Amit Varma]: Article 231 would not work. Beyond saying that Germany could not afford these reparations,
[Amit Varma]: it also pointed out the problem that policy makers of those times faced because they simply
[Amit Varma]: did not know the national income of the various countries. Had a measure called the GDP existed
[Amit Varma]: at the time, the other countries could have taken one look at Germany's GDP and known that
[Amit Varma]: the reparations they wanted it to pay were just not possible. But they didn't. The GDP as we know
[Amit Varma]: it was later born at the time of World War II and Keynes again played a part, publishing a book in
[Amit Varma]: 1940 called How to Pay for the War. The title of the book reveals the impetus behind GDP calculation.
[Amit Varma]: But I have a larger question that intrigues me. Had the GDP existed as a measure in 1919,
[Amit Varma]: could we have avoided World War II? Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host,
[Amit Varma]: Amit Badma. Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen. The GDP has been the subject of controversy for
[Amit Varma]: the last few years in India. And part of the reason for that has nothing to do with economics
[Amit Varma]: and everything to do with politics. How can we tell if a government is doing a good job?
[Amit Varma]: One measure is the economy. How can we tell how well the economy is doing? The most common metric
[Amit Varma]: is the GDP. So no wonder there's been so much fighting over it, illustrating what a Greek
[Amit Varma]: economist said a few years ago, quote, statistics as a combat sport, stop quote. So I decided to
[Amit Varma]: get someone on the show who knows this combat sport intimately and could demystify GDP for me,
[Amit Varma]: both the broad concept of it, as well as the contours of the ongoing controversies in India.
[Amit Varma]: Rajeshwari Sengupta is an economist who works at the IGIDR and has written important papers and
[Amit Varma]: articles in GDP, which will be linked from the show notes. Before we cut to my conversation
[Amit Varma]: with her though, let's take a quick commercial break. This episode of the Scene and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: is brought to you by Storytel. Storytel is an audiobook platform which you can listen to on
[Amit Varma]: your Android or iOS app. They have thousands of audiobooks that you can listen to on your mobile,
[Amit Varma]: including hundreds in local languages like Hindi and Marathi and unlimited monthly subscription
[Amit Varma]: costs only rupees 2.99 per month. And you can also get a 30 day free trial. If you hop on over
[Amit Varma]: to Storytel.com slash IBM. I actually use Storytel myself regularly. So as long as I sponsor the
[Amit Varma]: show, I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love. The book I want to recommend today is
[Amit Varma]: actually in Bengali. It's a book called Ghore Bhaire by Rabindranath Tagore, which was also
[Amit Varma]: made into a classic film by Shruthi Jitrai. Check it out on Storytel. And remember, you get a 30
[Amit Varma]: day free trial only at Storytel.com slash IBM. Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen Rajeshwari.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much. I'm very happy to be here. Tell me a little bit about yourself. Like what's
[Guest]: your background? How did you become an economist? So that's a very loaded question. How did I become
[Guest]: an economist? I feel I'm still becoming an economist. So I, I studied in Calcutta. And
[Guest]: I went to Presidency College and I got into the economics program. So I've been there.
[Guest]: And until then, I really didn't have very much of an idea of what economics is all about, except
[Guest]: that I sort of liked it, the whole supply demand and how price gets decided and all of that.
[Guest]: Now, while in Presidency College, those three years, I think had the biggest impression in my
[Guest]: mind as far as my future career is concerned. Because the kind of professors that I had and
[Guest]: the kind of books that we got exposed to, and the kind of friends and peers that I had and
[Guest]: discussions that I had were absolutely phenomenal. And that kind of convinced me that if there is
[Guest]: one subject that I want to study, and I always had sort of an academic bent of mind that I wanted to
[Guest]: study, that's something that I just wanted to do. I thought that it has to be economics. And
[Guest]: then after that, it was just a gradual progression from one step to the other. The usual things that
[Guest]: people do, you do a master's, then I did a PhD, because I wanted to become an economist. And then
[Guest]: after doing a PhD, I still had the impression that I did it in the US. And I thought, I will
[Guest]: become a professor in the US, like my thesis advisor, and I'll have a career in the US
[Guest]: University and that will be it. But luck obviously had a big role to play. This was after the global
[Guest]: financial crisis. This was 2010-11. And the job market there was really bad. And I was not
[Guest]: graduating from that one of the top 10 universities in the US, which meant that my job prospects in
[Guest]: the US were not that great, all the offers that I was getting from not kind of places, but I wanted
[Guest]: to be in. So then the obvious choice was to come back to India, which I did. And frankly speaking,
[Guest]: other than the three years that I spent in Presidency College, whatever happened after that
[Guest]: was a bit of a blur, because I learned the techniques, the tools, the jargon of economics,
[Guest]: but I didn't really get the juice of the subject, so to speak. That happened when I came back to
[Guest]: India, which I had not expected at all. I thought that my career was over. I am back in India. Who
[Guest]: studies economics in India, especially my field was macroeconomics. How do you publish in journals,
[Guest]: you don't have access to data sets. So I was in a doom and gloom mode. And then eventually,
[Guest]: eventually after a couple of years in India, in Madras, I went to Bombay, I came to Bombay,
[Guest]: and I joined IGIDR. And there I met a really interesting bunch of people who are really
[Guest]: passionate about working about Indian economics, Indian public policy. And that's when I really
[Guest]: started discovering my real joy and passion of economics. So what I thought was going to happen
[Guest]: in my graduation and post graduation, ended up happening many, many years later in a very
[Guest]: unexpected way when I landed in IGIDR in Bombay. And today, I think I'm still learning economics,
[Guest]: but the joy that I'm getting out of it by studying Indian economics is something that I had never
[Guest]: expected. So very long answer to your short question is, how did I become an economist
[Amit Varma]: by coming back to India? No, no, it's not long enough. In fact, so just to kind of ask a follow
[Amit Varma]: up question, I have to point out that the honesty is refreshing, because most people who took this
[Amit Varma]: trajectory would probably say something like, oh, I could have, you know, taught at Harvard there,
[Amit Varma]: but I wanted to save my country. And that's not what you said. But what also intrigued me about
[Amit Varma]: what you just said was that, while you learn the techniques and the jargon and all of that while
[Amit Varma]: doing PhD, you learn the juice of economics, when you came back. And that's a very intriguing
[Guest]: phrase. What do you mean by the juice of economics? Okay, so what I meant is when I was studying in
[Guest]: Delhi school and later on in the US, I learned the models and the tools and the techniques in
[Guest]: a very mechanical way. So I was doing well, because I was learning the models. But the application of
[Guest]: it to solve a real problem was not something that I was thinking about. I was not applying my mind
[Guest]: to solve problems. I was applying my mind to solve other kinds of problems that would get me through
[Guest]: the exams and the qualifiers. But in terms of a macro problem of a country, I definitely was not
[Guest]: thinking about it. Also, because in the US, it's a very different scenario, because the US is just
[Guest]: so developed by now, that the frontiers of research have gone to the next level. And you're just
[Guest]: thinking of improving the field of economics itself and coming up with new models. But you're
[Guest]: not really asking really interesting questions, fundamental questions, which is what happened in
[Guest]: India, because of the stage of growth that India is in, because it is an emerging economy. And there
[Guest]: are so many unanswered questions. And there are so few people who are working, especially in the
[Guest]: field of macroeconomics, that the scope and potential to do good work is immense. And that's
[Guest]: what I meant by the juice of economics, that I finally started thinking about how to apply those
[Guest]: models and tools to solve questions, to answer questions that would benefit the country. Of
[Guest]: course, when I say benefit the country, that's a very, very big statement that I'm making.
[Guest]: But what I mean is, you read something in, let's say, a budget speech, you read something in a
[Guest]: government document, in a central bank document, in an announcement, and you start thinking the
[Guest]: replications of it, what are the effects of this on the economy, how this is going to trickle down
[Guest]: to the rest of the sectors. And that's when I started applying my mind and the training that I
[Guest]: had received to try to answer some of these questions. And that's when I thought I was
[Guest]: getting into the juice of economics, because I was becoming an applied economist. And I was
[Guest]: applying myself to come up with answers and to also think deeply into some of the problems that
[Guest]: why this is happening, why that is not happening, which was not the case earlier. Because as I said,
[Guest]: in the US, I was reading papers, and I was I was at the level of the literature of what the topics
[Guest]: were, but not so much about what the economy was facing. And here, I finally got the scope to marry
[Guest]: the topics and the techniques with what the economy is going through. So today, for example,
[Guest]: when I read the news, or when I myself write articles, I feel that I'm really in the throw
[Guest]: of things that you know, I understand what's going on, I'm trying to understand what's going on.
[Guest]: And in a teeny weeny way, I can contribute a little bit to change things to make things better.
[Guest]: And that's what really drives me that, you know, for the next n number of years, if I just keep at
[Guest]: it, then I can see that something tangible can happen in this country, again, in a very small way.
[Guest]: So that really drives my whole passion to continue to be an economist that I can keep
[Guest]: extracting the juice more and more and keep understanding more and more and asking more and
[Amit Varma]: more questions, which to me is just fascinating. No, and that really speaks to me, because like I
[Amit Varma]: had a recent argument on Twitter with someone or the other about economics, and they were like,
[Amit Varma]: why are you criticizing so and so person's economic policy and whatever, it doesn't matter
[Amit Varma]: in the real world. And I was like, no economics has deep humanitarian consequences, especially
[Amit Varma]: in a country like India, where there are millions of people who are in poverty. And that's really a
[Amit Varma]: moral issue that we must all deal with. Bad economics has huge humanitarian consequences.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess what you're saying is that, fine, you did all the theory, you read all the books,
[Amit Varma]: but then you come to India and you're face to face with the notion that these policies are not
[Amit Varma]: words on paper, they actually impact. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. Who are the sort of thinkers who
[Amit Varma]: influenced you? You know, are there any books that you'd recommend to my listeners?
[Guest]: So, frankly speaking, when I was going through the, I call it the program, because you do the
[Guest]: undergrad and you're the grad and you're the PhD and you're in the job market. I was reading a lot
[Guest]: of books just because I love reading. But I remember when I was in college, Fountainhead
[Guest]: by Ayn Rand influenced me deeply. Just the whole notion of the book and the concept of it. But
[Guest]: it's very hard to remember a book during those years of my life that influenced me, perhaps
[Guest]: because there was no time to get influenced. There was no freedom and luxury to get influenced. But
[Guest]: all of that also happened when I came back and I started reading a lot more and thinking a lot more
[Guest]: about the schools of economic thought. So at first, and because I'm a macroeconomist, I only
[Guest]: knew about that part of the subject really well, is I first used to think that I'm a Keynesian and
[Guest]: I really liked telling people that, you know, I'm a Keynesian. It meant something that I belong to
[Guest]: the Keynesian school of thought and what the government can do to uplift an economy and all
[Guest]: of that. So I read a lot of books by, for example, John Kenneth Galbraith about what Keynes used to
[Guest]: think about, how his entire thinking developed and all of that. But then as I started thinking
[Guest]: more and more and started applying that to the Indian context, I realized that maybe that's not
[Guest]: optimal today. Maybe it was really a good idea back then, when you're coming out of a Great
[Guest]: Depression, you're coming out of Second World War. It was the time and place at that point of time,
[Guest]: but maybe not in the 21st century. And that if you really push the government's role too much,
[Guest]: there are many unintended consequences and then you just don't know what to do with it.
[Guest]: That's when I started reading Milton Friedman, because he sort of gives the opposite view of
[Guest]: how things can be, the entire free market, exactly the opposite of it. So there's a book by him
[Guest]: called Freedom to Choose, which I really liked. And I would say that had a very, very deep influence
[Guest]: on me. And then I could connect to some extent that with the Ayn Rand, Fountainhead philosophy,
[Guest]: that whole notion of freedom and what individuals can do by themselves, very different from the
[Guest]: Keynesian period phase that I went through. So I would say Milton Friedman, that freedom to choose
[Guest]: had a very, very big influence. And Hayek, again, it's basically in the same line of thought.
[Guest]: So that's what I started reading more into and getting more and more influenced by.
[Guest]: And basically, that's it.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, philosophically, what the subject of our episode is about GDP,
[Amit Varma]: philosophically, what governments attempt to do with the GDP is the opposite of what Hayek wrote
[Amit Varma]: in his famous essay about the use of knowledge in society, where Hayek's whole point was that
[Amit Varma]: knowledge and it was an argument against central planning. And his whole point was that central
[Amit Varma]: planning fails because knowledge is dispersed all through a society. And it's individuals
[Amit Varma]: making their own decisions with the help of the price system that really helps an economy run.
[Amit Varma]: And the GDP, on the other hand, comes from a centralizing instinct of, wait a minute,
[Amit Varma]: we need to control the economy and the nation and we need a metric that helps us understand that
[Amit Varma]: and therefore the GDP. But the origin of the GDP goes well before even the 20th century,
[Amit Varma]: it goes back into the Middle Ages. Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I'll come back to this point that you made about Hayek and GDP later,
[Guest]: but to answer that question. So GDP, the way we know it has its origin in the 20th century,
[Guest]: but the whole concept of measuring the income of a country or the national income actually goes back
[Guest]: to the 17th century, sometime around 1650s. There's a man called William Petty. He was a
[Guest]: physician in the British army, if I'm not wrong. He took on himself the task of surveying the
[Guest]: national wealth of Ireland. And this was in the context of Oliver Cromwell promising his soldiers
[Guest]: that he's going to give everybody a piece of land. So William Petty went about the task of valuing
[Guest]: agricultural land, valuing labor, and in general, to build a system of accounts that would enable
[Guest]: the king or the ruler to impose taxes, essentially. So back then in those days,
[Guest]: the whole concept of measuring national income was so that the government or the ruler or the king
[Guest]: could use that for imposing taxes on the subjects, and also to limit accumulation of wealth in very
[Guest]: few individual hands, because he would not want few people to become really rich and really wealthy,
[Guest]: more than him, for example. So that was the origin of measuring national income. Even in France,
[Guest]: around the same time, there were a group of people called the physiocrats, right? They decided that
[Guest]: you divide the economy into three kinds of people. You have the bourgeois class, who's basically the
[Guest]: land owners, and then you have the productive people who's using the land to come up with
[Guest]: agricultural crops, etc. And then you have what he called the unproductive set. And these are the
[Guest]: these are the, he called it the sterile set, I think, these are the artisans, who are the king
[Guest]: himself, in fact, who doesn't really do anything to contribute to the national income. And there
[Guest]: again, the idea was that you measure the value of land that's owned by the bourgeois, and that
[Guest]: is being used by the productive class, so that it can be used for taxation purposes. So the taxation
[Guest]: purposes and also how to pay for war, you know, as you mentioned, it was in Keynes title, but
[Guest]: way, way back then, how do you cover the costs of war is when you get a sense of how much income the
[Amit Varma]: nation is producing. One of the impetuses for William Petty, you know, and he introduced
[Amit Varma]: double entry bookkeeping also, was the second Anglo Dutch war, which was between 1664 and 1667,
[Amit Varma]: as you pointed out, and that was one of the impetuses, because if you've promised land to
[Amit Varma]: your soldiers, you actually need to know how much land you have and how much you can realistically
[Guest]: promise. And what struck me about William Petty's exercise was that I think he thought of the
[Guest]: national income as essentially a system of accounts that would benefit the king or the ruler.
[Guest]: And the ruler would be able to use this to appropriate taxes. He did not think of it at
[Guest]: all as anything inducing welfare. He did not think of it as something that the subjects would benefit
[Guest]: from. It was entirely something in the interest of the British Kingdom or whichever the nation was.
[Guest]: And that was the narrow purpose. And it was again, very important to keep in mind that when he's
[Guest]: valuing agricultural land, he's monetizing the value. So it's a monetary value of the income
[Guest]: from land. There's no social or psychological or ethical notion associated with that value.
[Guest]: It's just cutthroat and dry that, you know, you are just assigning a monetary value to land
[Guest]: so that your king can use that to impose taxes. That's it.
[Guest]: So that he can figure out, okay, what kind of, how much tax should I charge, how much is too much.
[Guest]: And how much money do I have at my disposal if I want to conquer the next territory,
[Guest]: right? If I want to wage a war. So that was the origin of national income as we know it.
[Guest]: But GDP, the way we know it today is actually a more recent concept with the origins do go
[Guest]: back to petty, but in the true form of it, it actually came up in the 20th century.
[Guest]: And I think there's a quote that warfare is the mother of invention. And many people would say
[Guest]: that the second world war was the reason for the invention of GDP, but that's not entirely correct.
[Guest]: Because GDP actually came about before the second world war with the start of, as you were saying
[Guest]: in the introduction, it actually started with the great depression, because other than Germany,
[Guest]: not knowing how much income they were producing, when the great depression,
[Guest]: you know, the mother of all crisis hit the US economy in the late 1920s,
[Guest]: there was no estimate of how much income the US economy is producing. And therefore,
[Guest]: when the government, whatever policies President Hoover was implementing at that point of time,
[Guest]: what is the recovery effect of those policies? It was very hard to assess that because you did not
[Guest]: have a consistent measure of the total output. And if you don't have a measure of the total output,
[Guest]: how do you know whether the economy is recovering or not? So I think it was already known by then
[Guest]: that you need to measure income slash output of the country to know what the performance is,
[Guest]: to assess the performance. I think that was clear from Petty's time onward. But the measure of it
[Guest]: and how to go about doing it was not known till the 1920s. And that is why when Hoover came up
[Guest]: with his policies, he actually based his policies on really sketchy details like he had data on
[Guest]: freight car loadings, he had data on stock market indices, and that's pretty much it. And some very
[Guest]: sketchy indices of industrial production, far from enough, when the country is going through
[Guest]: something like the Great Depression, and you needed regular assessment of how the economy
[Guest]: is recovering, if at all. And I would say that a big reason why Hoover failed miserably,
[Guest]: was because there was no assessment, there was no metric available to evaluate the situation.
[Guest]: And to come back to the point that you said about Keynes and GDP and all of that,
[Guest]: we have to keep in mind that by the time Great Depression hit the US,
[Guest]: that was the era of classical economics. Of course, Keynes was not there till then, right? So
[Guest]: classical economics is all about, again, free market. It's all about, there's no role of the
[Guest]: government whatsoever. When Hoover was hit by the Great Depression, he was still thinking that
[Guest]: the market is going to solve itself, and the government need not do anything. And all of that
[Guest]: also goes, is consistent with the idea that you did not need a measure of the economy, because
[Guest]: the market doesn't need the measure of the economy, and there's no role for the government.
[Guest]: So why do you need to measure GDP or national income? All that changed with the Great Depression.
[Guest]: So while as much as I would say that Hayek, or the free market economists, Friedman, etc,
[Guest]: would champion the cause of individuals, free markets, back then it would have been very
[Guest]: difficult to keep championing it, when the country is in the throes of a Great Depression,
[Guest]: and the market was in no situation to solve itself, or individuals for that matter. And perhaps you
[Guest]: needed the government to step in, because there were just no alternative. So the time and place
[Guest]: was ripe for Keynesianism to develop. And that goes hand in hand with the development of GDP,
[Guest]: because Keynesianism would not have come about without GDP, and GDP would not have survived
[Guest]: without Keynesianism. And that was perhaps just not the time for the free market ideology, because
[Guest]: the country was in absolute shambles. And you get two shocks, you get the Great Depression,
[Guest]: you get the Second World War, then what do you do? You can't just wait for the markets to solve
[Guest]: things. So I would think that that time and place in that context, perhaps that was the right thing
[Guest]: to do. And once Roosevelt became the president, there's this history that 1920s was when
[Guest]: there's this institution called the National Bureau of Economic Research, the NBER in the US.
[Guest]: It was set up in the 1920s by Wesley Mitchell, a very famous economist. And Wesley Mitchell's
[Guest]: student was Simon Kuznets, basically the founding father of modern GDP. And that was the time the
[Guest]: Great Depression was coming up, that 1929 and 1930s. So there's NBER that has been set up,
[Guest]: and Kuznets had already started a bit of a work on estimating national income. Unbeknownst to him,
[Guest]: what was going to happen to it as a result of the depression. Now, when the depression hits and
[Guest]: Hoover loses the election, Roosevelt comes to power. At that point of time, Roosevelt realizes
[Guest]: that we need a measure of what of the country to figure out what the heck to do and how the
[Guest]: recovery can happen. And the Department of Commerce, the White House, tells the Department
[Guest]: of Commerce, the Department of Commerce is told that we have to figure out a research program by
[Guest]: which technically, the output of the country can be measured. Then the Department of Commerce
[Guest]: contacts NBER. And because in NBER by that time, under Wesley Mitchell, Kuznets had already started
[Guest]: that work, that task falls upon him, that come up with a comprehensive measure of the total output
[Guest]: of the country. So that's basically the starting point of how GDP came about in very turbulent
[Amit Varma]: times. So for those of my listeners who are not kind of familiar with Keynesianism and so on,
[Amit Varma]: just to kind of simplify that, perhaps in simplistic terms, would it be then fair to say
[Amit Varma]: is that what Keynesianism basically is, is that if the economy is in a very bad space,
[Amit Varma]: if the government spends a lot of money, then you're putting money in the hands of consumers,
[Amit Varma]: and they start spending it on goods and all and a virtuous cycle starts and the economy revives.
[Amit Varma]: But if you want to do this, you also have to be able to measure whether the money you're pumping
[Amit Varma]: into the economy is actually working, you need a metric for this, and therefore the need for
[Guest]: something like the GDP. Is that accurate? Absolutely, that's bang on. So because
[Guest]: Keynesianism gives so much importance to the role of the government, and the whole idea is when you
[Guest]: are going through such turbulent times, the government can save the economy by pumping in
[Guest]: more money, by spending more money, and therefore the government is the most important player.
[Guest]: And when the government is the most important player, it becomes essential to have a measure
[Guest]: like GDP, which will tell the government that what is the impact of your policies in the short run,
[Guest]: in the short run meaning let's say in one quarter, two quarters, three quarters,
[Guest]: is it helping, is the economy recovering, is the growth of the economy going up, going down,
[Guest]: whatever it is. So that's why the two concepts went hand in hand, the Keynesian emphasis on
[Guest]: government saving the economy and pulling it out of a slowdown, and the government having access to
[Guest]: national income numbers of the country to say that are the policies really effective or not.
[Guest]: So that's why I think the confluence of events was such that GDP had to develop the way it did,
[Guest]: and it perpetuated the role of the government too, because you need GDP to do policies,
[Guest]: government policies, and you need government policies to keep GDP alive.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you make GDP the one sole metric, then suddenly you're focused on that,
[Amit Varma]: and then the role of the, and they kind of feed into each other. What I also find very
[Amit Varma]: interesting about this phase in the mid 30s, late 30s, is that there's also a philosophical
[Amit Varma]: debate happening. And while Kuznets is, as you said, the father of the GDP and one of the
[Amit Varma]: gigantic figures behind it, he ends up on the wrong side, he ends up losing the debate,
[Guest]: basically. Tell me a bit about that. Yeah, so at that point of time,
[Guest]: when Kuznets was given the task of developing the measure of total output of the country,
[Guest]: he was of the opinion that, you know, GDP is just going to be an aggregate measure of total
[Guest]: goods and services produced in the country. But he was not too much in favour of including
[Guest]: government expenditure, because he thought that the main government expenditure, and this was
[Guest]: again, you're coming out of the Great Depression, and then inching closer towards the Second World
[Guest]: War. So his first task was to give a sense of economic growth for 1929, 30 and 31, the Great
[Guest]: Depression years. But then the World War comes, and then government expenditure in the US shoots
[Guest]: up, because the government starts spending so much on producing arms and ammunition. And that
[Guest]: point of time, GDP became an extremely useful tool, because you could assess the capacity of
[Guest]: the country or the economy to produce arms and ammunitions. You know, how could you convert
[Guest]: simple industries like an automobile industry into a military aircraft manufacturing industry,
[Guest]: right? How do you increase the productive capacity in terms of arms and ammunitions,
[Guest]: without affecting individual consumption? All of these concepts became very, very useful,
[Guest]: because you had GDP as a tool. Now, Kuznets did not want to include government expenditure
[Guest]: in his calculations of GDP, because his opinion was that if the government is spending on warfare,
[Guest]: that is essentially a negative thing. And which basically gives us the notion that he did have
[Guest]: that notion of welfare in mind, right? He was not just thinking of a physical material output the
[Guest]: way, for example, Petty may have thought about. He did have that welfare notion, whether consumers
[Guest]: are benefiting or not. In fact, an interesting insight here, when Wesley Mitchell in NBR was
[Guest]: given the first NBER report of 1929, of 21, was about GDP. There, the founding fathers of NBER
[Guest]: had said, is the three things, is there enough income to provide a decent living to everybody?
[Guest]: Is the income growing at the same rate as the population? And is the income getting distributed
[Guest]: in a more or less unequal manner? So there was that thinking of distribution, welfare
[Guest]: in the minds of the NBER guys. So I think that's why Kuznets said that you can't include government
[Guest]: expenditure, because why would you want to include war expenses, which is subtracting
[Amit Varma]: from the welfare? I mean, one of the standard criticisms is that GDP measures both biscuits
[Amit Varma]: and bombs. Absolutely, absolutely. And that at one level doesn't seem to make sense. Because
[Amit Varma]: you know, the more bombs you explode, the more the GDP figures look good. In fact, if you just
[Amit Varma]: have an all out war, if India goes to war with Pakistan tomorrow, our GDP will go up. That
[Guest]: doesn't make sense. And that's why US had that wartime expansion of the economy, because the
[Guest]: major part of the government spending was on defense budget, and was on building on arms and
[Guest]: on arms and ammunition factories. But then the people, the other people, others who were in the
[Guest]: debate did not like what Kuznets was thinking, because they wanted to include government
[Guest]: expenditure, because it was such a big component. So Kuznets lost that, that debate, and government
[Guest]: expenditure became a very integral part of GDP, as a result of which, of course, US, the size of
[Guest]: the economy went up manifold, because as I said, the defense budget was massive. And doesn't it
[Amit Varma]: kind of become self fulfilling, like if you include government spending in that, then the
[Amit Varma]: government can just keep spending more and more and say, look, the GDP is going up, it's working.
[Guest]: Now, now, therefore, you come to Keynesianism. So that kind of paves the way exactly for what
[Guest]: Keynes said, that listen, if you want the economy to grow out of a slowdown, all that you have to
[Guest]: do is the government has to spend. Because the moment you include government expenditure in GDP,
[Guest]: you get this magic wand in your hand, that all that the government has to do is spend,
[Guest]: which is what the governments end up doing. So that's where I think Kuznets lost the battle.
[Guest]: And the whole notion of welfare or distribution, all of these things went out of the window. And
[Guest]: the entire focus was on how do you increase the size of the economy. And when you are stuck in a
[Guest]: slowdown, John Maynard Keynes has said, all that you have to do is the government has to spend.
[Guest]: So the government kept spending. So after the Second World War, when the war has ended,
[Guest]: Kuznets was also the opinion that, okay, fine, we are building a wartime measure of GDP, because
[Guest]: it's for the cause of national survival, and it's important, and I'm doing it. But once the war is
[Guest]: over, we must spend time thinking about a peacetime measure of national income. But of course, that
[Guest]: never happened. Because once you get, I think, addicted to this notion that, you know, growing
[Guest]: at a fast rate is just so easy, because the government defence budget has to keep increasing,
[Guest]: people are consuming, consumers are happy, you get a post-war expansion of the US economy.
[Guest]: Why would you rethink GDP at that point of time? And that's the second battle that I think Kuznets
[Guest]: lost. And Keynes won because Keynesianism got sealed after the Second World War. And there
[Guest]: is a quote by Keynes, and I don't remember the exact words. He basically said that a grand
[Guest]: experiment has begun. If what is true of the wartime can also be true of the peacetime,
[Guest]: then it'll be a great thing. Meaning that during the war, the US became such a big economy by
[Guest]: the government spending on defence and military, if the same thing can continue, basically government
[Guest]: spending, then that's great. And that's exactly what the US economy kept on doing through the
[Guest]: 40s, 50s, 60s. So basically, this is called the golden era of US economy, when the government
[Guest]: spending just went through the roof, everybody was consuming, it was a happy period, and GDP
[Amit Varma]: and GDP was growing. And I guess part of the impetus for the GDP also came from other events of
[Amit Varma]: those times. For example, there was a Marshall Plan where the US was rebuilding Europe and they
[Amit Varma]: said, look, we need to know whether it's working or not. So we need the GDP. There's a Cold War
[Amit Varma]: where you're in this hardcore male ego battle about who is bigger. And there again, what you
[Amit Varma]: know, you need some metric and hey, we got the GDP and we got, you know, how do you make the GDP
[Amit Varma]: go up? I'm just I'm just wondering, I'm just thinking aloud here. Has anyone actually surveyed
[Amit Varma]: that if you did not include government spending this kind of destructive spending in the GDP,
[Amit Varma]: would the economy still have done apparently so well?
[Guest]: So I don't know whether we have disaggregated data for the US economy dating that far back.
[Guest]: And I'm sure the data is there NBR itself would have the data. But I think it's a great question
[Guest]: that one if you have the data, and if you know the techniques of constructing GDP, if you can
[Guest]: just take out government expenditure from that and recalculate US economy size to see what would
[Guest]: have happened. And my sense is, it would show a smaller economy, and it would show a significantly
[Guest]: lower growth rate. Because once you take government expenditure out, there was nothing much else that
[Guest]: was happening. Because remember what Cain said, and what you say also that once the government
[Guest]: starts spending, it's like you're triggering a spiral through the economy. And what Cain's called
[Guest]: it technically the multiplier effect, it just keeps feeding on itself and the economy starts
[Guest]: growing and growing. Because the government is putting money in the hands of people, people are
[Guest]: using that to consume, therefore you're producing more goods, and more incomes are getting generated,
[Guest]: so on so forth. Once you take government out of the GDP account, you just don't have it. I mean,
[Guest]: what would you calculate, right? So it's tricky. I mean, in the sense that my sense is you would
[Guest]: probably end up getting a smaller size of the economy.
[Amit Varma]: And this whole notion of how war helps the economy commits what is called the broken
[Amit Varma]: window fallacy after Bastia's parable of the broken window from which this podcast takes
[Amit Varma]: its name, the seen and the unseen, it emerges out of this. Bastia's parable basically was that if
[Amit Varma]: somebody throws a stone and breaks your window, and you have to get the window repaired, people
[Amit Varma]: will say, hey, it's good for the economy, because, you know, it's helping the guy who repairs the
[Amit Varma]: window is good for everyone, which is the seen effect. But the unseen effect, as Bastia pointed
[Amit Varma]: out, is that if the money had remained with the person with the broken window, if he didn't have
[Amit Varma]: to spend it on getting the window repaired, he would have spent it on something else,
[Amit Varma]: which would have had a productive impact somewhere else in the economy. So while it appears that all
[Amit Varma]: this destruction is good for the economy and indeed for GDP, we need to look at the unseen
[Amit Varma]: sort of effect of that. I'd like to talk now about, you know, the sort of GDP measures output
[Amit Varma]: fine, it ignores welfare. So Kuznets lost there. But even in terms of output, there are all these
[Amit Varma]: curiosities and quirks in terms of what it cannot measure. For example, while researching this,
[Amit Varma]: I read about this thing called the widower paradox, which is if a widower marries his
[Amit Varma]: domestic help, the GDP of the country goes down because suddenly he's not paying her anymore,
[Amit Varma]: which, you know, illustrates that a lot of productive work that is happening in the
[Guest]: economy is not being measured. Yeah, yeah. So, absolutely. But before I come to that,
[Guest]: Amit, can I just because I just like this story so much, I just I'm just going to describe in
[Guest]: very short what happened during the Cold War period since you brought up Cold War. And that
[Guest]: also highlights the obsession with GDP that had already started since then, because that's what
[Guest]: we see today. So what happened during the Cold War years is because the US was just so obsessed
[Guest]: about showing to the rest of the world that they were growing at a really high rate, and they were
[Guest]: doing great economically. And the USSR, the Soviet Union at that point of time, had a very different
[Guest]: measure, by the way, they were measuring something called net material product, which was just the
[Guest]: physical goods, because they were so high on industrial production, they were not measuring
[Guest]: government expenditure, they were not measuring services. But even within that, they were showing
[Guest]: that they were also growing at a very high rate, the economy size is big, because industrial
[Guest]: production was massive. And the US did not believe it, they didn't obviously want those numbers to
[Guest]: stay in people's minds. So the CIA was actually appointed and told to spy on the Russian GDP,
[Guest]: so called whatever national income numbers, and find flaws in it. So the CIA actually spent decades
[Guest]: and enough resources and spies to get all the information about Russian national income
[Guest]: generation, and started poking holes in it, to the extent that in the 1982, I think,
[Guest]: this was the fag end of communism, so to speak, the CIA held a big conference to expose all the
[Guest]: flaws of the Russian national income generation, which showed that the USSR GDP was actually half
[Guest]: of what the official number had been. And that was victory for the US because they're just shown
[Guest]: to the world this and they are just fudging the numbers, they don't know how to calculate GDP.
[Guest]: And as luck would have it, by that time, Mikhail Gorbachev was the leader, and the fall of the
[Guest]: Berlin War happened. And at that point of time, Gorbachev admitted that yes, there are problems
[Guest]: with our national income statistics, we need to reestimate it. And he invited the CIA and the
[Guest]: Bureau of Economic Analysis of the US to teach them how to use the US GDP calculation method
[Guest]: to get the Russian GDP. And I think with that fall of the Berlin War, of course, is important
[Guest]: for many reasons. But this was one, the GDP literally became the global metric for measuring
[Guest]: economic progress anywhere else, because you had basically won over the communist side of the world
[Guest]: as well. And I just find that story so fascinating that you know, it's just, it's a number and it
[Amit Varma]: just became so political. I think I know why you find it fascinating. In another day and age,
[Amit Varma]: a GDP expert like yourself could have worked with the CIA.
[Guest]: I mean, come to seriously come to think of it, right? That's that's seriously cool.
[Guest]: I mean, CIA spies getting information on national accounts and being called by Gorbachev to talk
[Guest]: about national income building is just a very different kind of notion that we have the GDP
[Amit Varma]: is only a statistician's boring world. Also, what I find very interesting about
[Amit Varma]: how the Soviets do their thing is, of course, we know every metric can be gamed. If you have
[Amit Varma]: a metric, you'll game it, whether it's a GDP or the ease of business ratings recently or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And even in the USSR, exactly that was happening, because their thing just measured that industrial
[Amit Varma]: output or whatever. It didn't measure things like quality or satisfaction or how many voluntary
[Amit Varma]: transactions are taking place. So for example, there's this famous apocryphal thing about how,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the factory would be given a target, you make so many TVs, and they would just put
[Amit Varma]: bricks in the TV thing, and it absolutely wouldn't work, which is amusing. But it also raises
[Amit Varma]: a deeper question that remains to the day that how do you measure qualitative output, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I might spend less money on buying a laptop today than I would 10 years back,
[Amit Varma]: or I might spend the same money, but the laptop can do so much else and the value like just with
[Amit Varma]: smartphones, for example, a phone of 2019 can just do things you couldn't dream of with the
[Amit Varma]: phone of 2004. And all of the value in that, for me, there's no way of capturing that.
[Guest]: Absolutely. And that's very well said. So, you know, so again, as we are seeing from this
[Guest]: discussion as well, that when GDP was invented, so to speak, it was just supposed to be a measure
[Guest]: of goods and services back in the day of the depression and war, etc, etc. But once you've
[Guest]: come through such a complexities of the modern economy, and so many things have changed in the
[Guest]: structure of economies, the main question is, is that same measure of GDP well equipped to
[Guest]: capture all of these complications? And the short answer is no, because back then it was a very
[Guest]: physical economy, the service sector was big, but still not as big. You did not have all these
[Guest]: technological innovations. Of course, the big difference is information, communication and
[Guest]: technology age, you did not have any of that. And these are mostly intangibles that you can't
[Guest]: value in the market. And GDP is all about valuing the products at the market price.
[Guest]: If you can't value all of these products, and as you said, variety of commodities or
[Guest]: quality improvements of commodities and services, how do you value them? And one way to value them
[Guest]: would be that the prices of these commodities are falling, as you said, like it's computed today,
[Guest]: significantly cheaper than what it was earlier. And the price index should capture it. And that
[Guest]: would get reflected in what we call the real GDP, because the real is basically you're just dividing
[Guest]: the nominal number by the price. So if the price falls, because the quality has improved so much,
[Guest]: then the overall real number should increase even more. But what happens is the price indices
[Guest]: themselves don't capture these improvements over time. So altogether, the measure of the output of
[Guest]: the economy has become an imperfect measure at its best. And actually, it's almost like an
[Guest]: artificial construct. It doesn't even exist in reality, because you're just sampling one part
[Guest]: of the economy and calculating what that output is. There's so many other things that are not
[Guest]: measuring quality of services, quality of goods, varieties, innovation, all of these things you're
[Amit Varma]: not. I mean, just one illustration of that is that, you know, in 1836, the richest man in the
[Amit Varma]: world was a guy called Nathan Rothschild. And he died of an infection because there were no
[Amit Varma]: antibiotics. And now he might have spent more than people spend today in the medicine of that day.
[Amit Varma]: But hey, so how do you measure this? Something like you know, cheap antibiotics being available
[Amit Varma]: at will and what it does to life expectancy and quality of life. And I mean, it's just infinite.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the very fact that you are here recording this podcast for me for no compensation,
[Amit Varma]: unfortunately, though, I did buy you a cup of coffee. How do you measure something like that?
[Amit Varma]: And how do you measure the sort of the insight that the listeners might get from listening to
[Amit Varma]: you, which, you know, you could not have had for love or money 50 years ago?
[Guest]: Absolutely. So, so the way I see it, Amit, is, you know, when we start talking about the
[Guest]: shortcomings or the weaknesses of the GDP concept, there are two angles to it. One is,
[Guest]: what all what are the omissions, what the GDP concept does not include, which is what we are
[Guest]: discussing. And the other part is the unintended consequences of countries desperately pursuing
[Guest]: a high GDP growth at any cost. There's a very famous example that this Italian economist did
[Guest]: a survey that in Japan is just basically surveying the number of air conditioners that the houses
[Guest]: have. And over a period of time, because the air conditioners are, you're cooling the air inside,
[Guest]: but you're also emitting hot air outside. And because the outside scenarios become so unlivable,
[Guest]: more and more houses start buying air conditioners. So the GDP would go up because,
[Guest]: you know, you're producing more air conditioners, but is that really a good quality of life to have?
[Guest]: So I think in that pursuit of growth, you are ignoring a lot of unintended consequences or
[Guest]: what we call negative externalities. For example, polluting industries may be rewarded because they
[Guest]: are adding to the output of the country. But is that really what we want when our water pollution,
[Guest]: air pollution is so bad? So I think we've reached a really tricky territory today that what Keynes
[Guest]: or Kuznets would not have envisioned back then, that the economy is a really complex,
[Guest]: and there is a rat race of GDP growth that's going on. I call it the status good. You know,
[Guest]: I mean, countries are ranked today on GDP tables. There is a hierarchy in the world today of
[Guest]: countries with the US leading, and the entire hierarchy is based upon GDP, the size of the
[Guest]: economy and the growth rate. Think of club memberships, right? I mean, G8, G20. All of
[Guest]: these club memberships are based on GDP. There was a time when entry into IMF and World Bank
[Guest]: as a member country was contingent upon whether you are following the international standards
[Amit Varma]: of national And not just that, I believe at a point in time, if not even today, that how much
[Amit Varma]: foreign aid you receive from the World Bank and IMF depended on how low your GDP was,
[Guest]: you see opposite impetus. Absolutely. So you have incentives going haywire about portraying the kind
[Guest]: of growth that your economy is experiencing. And either you want perceiving a really high growth
[Guest]: at what cost, there are environmental concerns and many others, or you're trying to show the
[Guest]: economy is not doing well, as you said, because you want to get aid. So what has gotten lost in
[Guest]: all of that is the notion that all that GDP was supposed to do is measure the output of the
[Guest]: country. That's it. Nothing more, nothing less. But if you use one measure or one indicator to
[Guest]: measure too many things, then you end up getting what we call an indeterminate world because you
[Guest]: will not do anything well. So I think we have lost the narrative somewhere that we want this
[Guest]: one indicator to capture everything. And we are not satisfied that it's not doing it. But at the
[Guest]: same time, countries and politicians are using this in a rat race in a global level to say,
[Guest]: my country is the fastest growing country or I'm the third largest, sixth largest country in the
[Guest]: world. So there is this inconsistency between the two. There are people who are saying GDP does not
[Guest]: capture A, B, C, D, E. It's causing negative consequences. But there are these governments
[Guest]: of the countries are saying, this is the biggest metric, the most important number in the world
[Guest]: today. And I'm fighting a rat race, which I need to win at any cost. And this is far, far from what
[Guest]: the founding fathers had thought. And it's just, it's become an irresolvable situation that
[Guest]: questions are raised. Should we continue with GDP? Do you discontinue? You come up with other
[Guest]: numbers? I think a lot is, I would say, too much is made of this. A mountain is made out of a mole
[Amit Varma]: hill. And what is kind of fascinating is that how from just being an arcane economic subject for
[Amit Varma]: economists like you, which you discuss in your economist cabals and conferences, it's become a
[Amit Varma]: hot button political issue. It's like, you know, like I say, GDP is a new pseudo secularism,
[Amit Varma]: that it's just part of the political discourse. And, you know, you have so much debate going on,
[Amit Varma]: are these metrics correct? Are these numbers correct?
[Guest]: Yeah, in fact, as you said, GDP is everywhere. It's in media, it's in policy debates,
[Guest]: it's the most ubiquitous number quoted. And, you know, I find fascinating that most of economic
[Guest]: concepts are mysterious for even a well informed lay person to understand. But the way GDP is thrown
[Guest]: about in a casual way would imply almost that it's a very simple, uncomplicated, comprehensive
[Guest]: measure that everybody understands. But it's exactly not that, it is just the opposite.
[Guest]: It's a very complicated, not at all a perfect measure of the size of the economy. And there
[Guest]: are many, many problems with it. But it's this usage in common parlance has become so widespread,
[Guest]: that we tend to make the mistake thinking, oh, it's a very simple measure, it's just a number.
[Guest]: And you just track the number every year. And you figure out whether you're doing good or whether
[Guest]: you're doing bad. And if you're doing bad, the government should do something about it.
[Guest]: And if you're doing good, then hey, let's try to do better. So it's become a very simple narrative.
[Guest]: But the actual concept is quite complicated. It is a relatively narrow one in scope. And
[Guest]: more importantly, we have to keep in mind that, you know, state capacity has to be really,
[Guest]: really well formed to measure a number like GDP correctly. I mean, it's not just our country or
[Guest]: China or Argentina, any country, even developed countries struggle to come up with a good number
[Guest]: or good measure of GDP, because it's a very, very complicated thing. Economies are getting more
[Guest]: complex, and you're trying to measure everything with that one number. So it's getting more and
[Guest]: more complicated. And you understand, I mean, the statistical agencies understand it. But you can't
[Guest]: prevent the politicians and the governments from making a very big deal out of it.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in the popular imagination is almost as if the GDP is an objective fact, a single number,
[Amit Varma]: like two plus two is equal to four. So you know, if one party is saying it's 5%, the other party
[Amit Varma]: saying it's 7%, they'll be each will behave like the other one is lying. But maybe they're both
[Amit Varma]: lying. And maybe they're both telling the truth. And it's such a nebulous thing. And there's a
[Amit Varma]: great illustration of that, that I read about recently, which is that in 2010, Ghana changed
[Amit Varma]: the way they tweaked the way they measure their GDP. And between November 5 and November 6 2010,
[Amit Varma]: their GDP rose 60%. And nothing changed in the economy. They just changed one of the small
[Amit Varma]: metrics. And similarly, in 2014, Nigeria added 89% to its GDP. But again, nothing changed in the
[Amit Varma]: economy. It's just the way that you measure it, which is subjective, complicated, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, in the same spirit, in the US, as I said, it's not just the emerging on the developing
[Guest]: countries in the US around 2006, seven or so, or maybe a little bit later, the idea was you include
[Guest]: software purchases as investment, and R&D as investment rather than as an input cost. And
[Guest]: because you started counting this as investment in 2013, the US GDP growth went up by 3% or more.
[Guest]: I mean, nothing has changed in the world. All the other countries haven't changed anything. But
[Guest]: suddenly us look so much better than the rest of the world, because you've just changed this one
[Guest]: small thing. And that shows you how imperfect the measure is. And it's constantly changing.
[Amit Varma]: And I think even in the 90s, there was something called hedonic pricing, which came into vogue,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of took into account not just the price of a product, but the increase in quality,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore priced it differently. And again, it suddenly appeared to the rest of the world
[Amit Varma]: that wow, the US is doing so well. And all they changed was they introduced this new little trick.
[Guest]: Exactly. So then therefore, it's far from being a perfect or a comprehensive measure.
[Guest]: And you can do any small changes and the number will go up. And then exactly as you said,
[Guest]: politicians start debating about, oh, it's a 5.5 versus six or 7.2 versus 7.5. But it's such an
[Guest]: imperfect thing. It's complicated. It's imperfect. Why do you want to give so much importance to it?
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, all of those debates should really happen in good faith. And instead,
[Amit Varma]: they are so filled with all of this political nonsense. It's so suffocating that we need a
[Amit Varma]: break. We'll take a quick commercial break. And we'll come back to talk about how exactly your
[Amit Varma]: exactly your measure GDP, what does it include? What does it not include how difficult it is?
[Unknown]: And oh, my God, we are going to help.
[Unknown]: IVMpodcast.com slash careers. We're really happy to announce the second season of Marvel's Lost
[Unknown]: and Found which premieres on the 23rd of July. This season, Zen and Avanti cover issues like
[Unknown]: addiction, mental health and kids grief, eating disorders and more. There are a number of special
[Unknown]: guests that will be on the podcast catch new episodes every Tuesday. On Cyrus's Supreme
[Unknown]: Court lawyer and founder of Swayam Farmer Foundation, Harshit Kohli talks to Cyrus
[Unknown]: about how he got started with Swayam, their objectives and why people in cities need to
[Unknown]: take more interest in farming. Also, in case you missed it, check out Cyrus's review of the 2019
[Unknown]: World Cup final with comedian Mikhail Almeida on last week's cricket special Lanceau.
[Unknown]: On the Ronnie Scruvalla podcast, Ronnie and I discuss the chapter second innings where Ronnie
[Unknown]: updates us about his current ventures and talks about how problem solving is different in a
[Unknown]: nonprofit organization. On the Filter Coffee podcast, Karthik is joined by award winning
[Unknown]: journalist and fellow podcaster Amit Verma. They discuss India's performance in the 2019
[Unknown]: Cricket World Cup, sports analytics and poker. On the Empowering series, Zarina is joined by two
[Unknown]: guests, theatre and TV actor Binaf Dadachanji and Chinese chef and serial entrepreneur Norman Ho.
[Unknown]: Together, they talk about their 10-year relationship, the importance of commitment
[Unknown]: and loyalty and how one should sustain, grow and evolve in a relationship.
[Unknown]: On our Kannada podcast, Thale Harate, Pawan talks to researcher Lingaraj Jayaprakash about
[Unknown]: Buchanan's journey, offering a unique insight into the life and times of the regions he travelled
[Unknown]: at the dawn of the 19th century. On Geekfruit, Jishnu is joined by the IBM staffers Abbas and
[Unknown]: Alka to talk about Stranger Things' latest season. And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen. I'm chatting with the economist Rajeshwari
[Amit Varma]: Sengupta on the GDP and we spent the show so far talking about what the history of the GDP is,
[Amit Varma]: how it evolved, the philosophical issues around it, what it measures and what it does not measure.
[Amit Varma]: And now I want to turn to A, how do you measure GDP? Gross domestic product, what is it? This
[Amit Varma]: is technical stuff. How do you measure it? And B, after that, come to what are all these
[Guest]: controversies in India all about? Okay, so a quick trivia before I go
[Guest]: into the technical measure of GDP. So since we talked about the history, when Kuznets and others
[Guest]: came up with the measure, it was called gross national product, GNP. The idea was that it's the
[Guest]: total market value of all goods and services produced by the people of a country within a
[Guest]: particular year. And the people of the country, that notion was important for gross national
[Guest]: product. I mean, the people of the country could be in US, could be in Japan, but it would be
[Guest]: included in the US GNP. And that continued till about 1990s GNP. Around 1990s, we had this notion
[Guest]: of gross domestic product. And gross domestic product is the total market value of goods and
[Guest]: services produced in a country in a particular year. And sold in the country. Yeah, produced and
[Guest]: sold in the country, doesn't matter whether it is just by the people of that country.
[Guest]: So therefore, basically, it means that if an Indian is sitting in Dubai producing something,
[Guest]: that will be counted in India's gross national product, but not a part of India's gross domestic
[Guest]: product. But if there is a Japanese guy sitting in Tamil Nadu in an automobile factory producing
[Guest]: something, that will be a part of India's gross domestic product. And the reason this became
[Guest]: important in the 1990s is once we had globalization, a lot of companies basically got the
[Guest]: license to set up subsidiaries in emerging markets and other countries. So it got delocalized. And
[Guest]: once it got delocalized, it became important to measure the output produced just within the
[Guest]: geographical boundaries of the country. And the interesting thing that it did was, when you went
[Guest]: from GNP to GDP, the size of the emerging economies just went up. Because emerging economies
[Guest]: were then at that point of time, post globalization, were the hosts of all the subsidiary
[Guest]: companies, outsourced companies, etc. So their output actually went up because you changed the
[Guest]: definition from GNP to GDP. And of course, the emerging economies have been growing at a
[Guest]: phenomenal rate since then. And I think a lot of that has to do with the definition change. But of
[Guest]: course, they themselves have been doing quite well. Now, in terms of how it's measured, as I
[Guest]: said, you basically value the, you assign a market price, market value to the total goods and
[Guest]: services produced in the country in a particular year. And there are three different ways of
[Guest]: measuring it. So think of a good or a service going through different stages. So there is a
[Guest]: production stage, there is a distribution stage, and there is a consumption stage. So exactly to
[Guest]: mirror that, Kuznets came up with three different ways to measure. You have a production approach,
[Guest]: expenditure approach, and an income approach. So in the production approach, what you're doing is
[Guest]: you are just estimating what is called value added. It's just as simple as total output minus
[Guest]: total cost, whatever the total revenue of the companies minus whatever the value of the inputs
[Guest]: used. That's the production approach. Then you have the expenditure approach, where you are just
[Guest]: summing up different expenditure components, and the total that you get is the GDP. And in the
[Guest]: different expenditure components, you have consumption expenditure, you have investment,
[Guest]: you have government expenditure, you have exports, and you would subtract import because import is
[Guest]: something that you're spending on goods and services of other countries. Now, this expenditure
[Guest]: component is actually, again, closest to the Keynesian idea, because Keynes was all about
[Guest]: boosting demand by increasing expenditure of the government. And that fits really well with this
[Guest]: Keynesian idea of the expenditure approach. And the third approach is the income approach,
[Guest]: where it's basically one is equivalent of the other, because if the companies are producing,
[Guest]: and you and I are consumers, we are consuming, then we are also getting some income because we
[Guest]: are the factors of production. So the labour, land, capital, these are the usual factors. So
[Guest]: the factored incomes that are being paid in the process of the production, get calculated in the
[Guest]: income approach. And the idea is that all of these three approaches will yield the same number.
[Guest]: There are some discrepancies here and there. But that's the overarching idea of measuring GDP.
[Guest]: And that's pretty much what is followed in every country. So that's, that's the main measure of
[Amit Varma]: GDP, so to speak. It's complicated, because in India, especially is complicated because
[Amit Varma]: of so many bad labour laws and industrial laws, we have a very large informal economy.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, those statistics are very hard to come by. So, you know, how do we get around that?
[Guest]: That's actually a very good point. Because so around the 1930s and 40s, after the World War,
[Guest]: the United Nations was developing what is called the System of National Accounts,
[Guest]: called the SNA. And the guy who was instrumental in building the SNA was Richard Stone, who actually
[Guest]: won the Nobel Prize for that. The SNA was the idea is that it's going to set international standards
[Guest]: for national income accounting for all the countries. Now, at that point of time,
[Guest]: because it was primarily done for the developed countries, there was not much of a problem in it.
[Guest]: But gradually, when GDP got exported to the rest of the world as the main metric of economic
[Guest]: performance, it was realised that emerging countries or developing countries do have a
[Guest]: very big informal or unorganised sector. And how would you value the output of this sector?
[Guest]: Now, there is no easy answer to that. And in fact, the SNA is not really a very helpful
[Guest]: outline to understand what's to be done. And in fact, the size of the informal economy is massive.
[Guest]: I mean, in some estimates, it's about 40 to 50% in emerging countries. Even in India,
[Guest]: it's a very, very big portion. And we don't have a very good measure of the informal sector,
[Guest]: which means that you end up excluding a big productive part of the economy from the official
[Guest]: measure of the size of output. And that's just a shortcoming that we live with. Because if you're
[Guest]: following the international guidelines, we have no guidance there. And we ourselves,
[Guest]: we have some crude measures of doing surveys, of figuring out what the informal sector contribution
[Guest]: is, but they are far from perfect. So that's a big gaping hole in the GDP calculation of
[Guest]: emerging countries, that we can't estimate what is the informal sector. And if I may digress,
[Guest]: I think one reason why when demonetization happened in the country, we could not estimate
[Guest]: the negative effect of demonetization, because majority of the effect was going to be on the
[Guest]: informal sector, which is the cash-based economy. But because we did not have a good measure of the
[Guest]: informal sector output, we could not measure what was the shock of the informal sector. And therefore,
[Guest]: today we think maybe demonetization did not have that much of an effect, because we just don't
[Guest]: have a measure of it. So it's very costly, when you can't measure about 40-45% of the economy.
[Guest]: And then you have a measure of the organized sector, so to speak, and you make such a big
[Guest]: deal of it. But that's just the state of the things today.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that even answers the question of why is a metric like the GDP important? It's important
[Amit Varma]: because then you have a sense of where the government is messing up and what it's doing right,
[Amit Varma]: you know, even if you don't think of it as a tool of central control. And I've had many episodes
[Amit Varma]: in the demonetization, and all my guests make pretty much the same point that it absolutely
[Amit Varma]: devastated the informal sector, but it's not going to show in statistics anywhere.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of sad. So how has thinking towards the GDP evolved in India over the years?
[Amit Varma]: Like, give me a sense of who measures it? Is there like a government agency whose responsibility it
[Amit Varma]: is to measure it? How have they arrived at a methodology? Is there a consensus around the
[Amit Varma]: methodology? How reliable is the kind of data which they get? Tell me a bit about all of those
[Guest]: problems.
[Guest]: So, we have actually a very rich history of national statistics in India. And the reason I
[Guest]: mentioned SNA earlier is because I wanted to talk about it, that when the system of national
[Guest]: accounts was developed by the UN, in the 1950s, Indian economists and statisticians actually
[Guest]: played a very important role there. In fact, VKR V. Rao, who was actually the founding father of
[Guest]: Delhi School of Economics, he was a part of the system of national accounts building. And he
[Guest]: contributed his intellectual inputs to their SNA model.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, brief digression, our mutual friend, Niranjan Raj Thaksher, told me recently that
[Amit Varma]: Dadabhai Naoroji had tried to calculate the national income in 1870.
[Guest]: See, there you go. So I think Indians, and of course, then later on, we have a professor of
[Guest]: Mahalanobis, right? I mean, he's like the father of statistics, so to speak, in India. So we had
[Guest]: a very, very rich history of good statistics and statisticians and economists in India.
[Guest]: And in fact, VKR V. Rao, again, interesting tidbit, was offered a position at Harvard
[Guest]: University at the same time when Kuznets was, and he did not take it, he instead came and
[Guest]: built the Delhi School of Economics. So that's how rich our background is. So we had the potential
[Guest]: to really be, you know, at the frontier of the GDP statistics, but we have actually gone exactly
[Guest]: the opposite way. So what happened is, in the past, we had, we were following the system of
[Guest]: national accounts off and on, and we had a very good bunch of statisticians. There's an organization
[Guest]: called Central Statistics Office, or the CSO. For the longest part till 1990s, a lot of the
[Guest]: statistical work was done out of ISI Calcutta. And that's where the National Sample Survey
[Guest]: Organization, the NSSO, was also set up. So the CSO, the Central Statistics Office, is primarily
[Guest]: responsible for calculating GDP in the country. The CSO collects data from multiple agencies,
[Guest]: ministries, etc., and collates everything together. There is a model that they use,
[Guest]: you put in all the numbers, and you get a GDP size, and the sectoral disaggregations, etc., etc.
[Guest]: And that is what has been happening for a very, very long time. Now, what happened recently is
[Guest]: that in 2015, the CSO released a new base year series. Now, after almost every five or six years,
[Guest]: the base year of the GDP is revised, because you need to calculate GDP in the benchmark of one
[Guest]: particular base year, because otherwise the prices are fluctuating, and you want to keep the prices
[Guest]: constant for one particular year. So the CSO releases in 2015, a new base year series,
[Guest]: but the base year is 2011-12. The earlier base year was 2004-05. Now, when the series was released
[Guest]: in 2015, what happened was the growth rate of the economy jumped significantly for all the years
[Guest]: where we have overlapping data available for the old series and the new series. Now, why was this
[Guest]: surprising? Because when you do a base year revision, base year revision is a very regular
[Guest]: thing. All countries do it, we have done it many times, and you should. So when you do a base year
[Guest]: revision, typically the size of the economy may change because you're probably doing a better
[Guest]: capture, but the growth rate never changes a lot. It's just the economy is just maybe getting bigger
[Guest]: in size, you're using better data and better methods, because you're capturing better,
[Guest]: you're getting a bigger size of the economy, but the growth rate doesn't change. What happened
[Guest]: in 2015 was we got a phenomenally increasing growth rate, especially in one sector, which was
[Guest]: the manufacturing sector. In fact, in one year, it went from negative growth rate in the old series
[Guest]: to almost 6 and 7% in the new series, which is a huge jump. And that happened consistently for
[Guest]: all the three years for which we had data of the old and the new we could compare. After one point,
[Guest]: of course, the old data got discontinued, we couldn't compare it with anything else,
[Guest]: we just had the new data. But the seeds of suspicion were planted in the minds of whichever
[Guest]: economist and statistician was looking at this series and wondering to themselves, what is going
[Guest]: on? How can you have such a high growth rate? And at that time, by 2016, we also got a feel of the
[Guest]: economy by looking at other things, you know, we were in the basically in a banking crisis,
[Guest]: exports were not growing, investment had stagnated. Now in a country where investment
[Guest]: has stagnated for a few years, the banking sector is in a non-performing asset crisis,
[Guest]: exports are not growing, how can you have an economy growing at 7%, 7.5%? And these kind of
[Guest]: disconnects, these kind of questions started getting raised a lot in the academic circles of
[Guest]: people who knew about the GDP measurement. And it was constricted within a group of a few economists
[Guest]: and statisticians who knew about the process. And there was a lot of debate back and forth
[Guest]: in journals and media and etc, etc. And that's when it started becoming more and more doubtful,
[Guest]: that there are some problems in the new series, and it's much more than what meets the eye. And
[Guest]: because GDP is such a complicated construct, as I said, not many people understand it. In fact,
[Guest]: Robert Solow back in the 70s had a quote that every quarter you have economists talking about
[Guest]: the GDP, but very few of them really understand what they're talking about, which is true even
[Guest]: today. So it became clear that there's something wrong in the GDP. And some people started writing
[Guest]: about the technical details of it, the methodology and etc. But the debate just went out of hand,
[Guest]: because the moment I think media and whatever it is politicians, they started getting a sniff of
[Guest]: that, oh, things are not right. It just went completely out of control. It was no longer a
[Guest]: debate restricted within 10 people understood the process, it became a debate involving many,
[Guest]: many people who did not understand the process at all, they just knew something was wrong,
[Guest]: the GDP did not pass what is called the smell test. And therefore we need to attack, we need to
[Guest]: criticize. And from then on, I think it just completely took its own form and shape. And the
[Guest]: cost of it was that very little was written about in public media. But exactly what is wrong,
[Guest]: and what can be done about it, it got so politicized so fast, that the Central Statistics
[Guest]: Office got very defensive. They started defending saying, whatever we have done is in keeping with
[Guest]: the system of SNA that I was talking about SNA 2008. It's in keeping with international guidelines,
[Guest]: everything is perfect. So it almost became like two camps, like there's a camp of people
[Guest]: who's criticizing the series. And there's a camp of people who's defending saying everything is
[Guest]: right. And is this camp partly driven by politics? I would think so. Because it also unfortunately,
[Guest]: or fortunately, whatever it is coincided with the time when BJP government came to power in 2014.
[Guest]: And right after that, the new series was released. And then the new series showed this government in
[Guest]: really good light because the economy was growing at breakneck speed. So automatically got politicized
[Guest]: with people thinking that is there a political motive, or what's going on. And the CSO increasingly
[Guest]: started withdrawing from the debate. Other institutions which are more political started
[Guest]: talking about GDP. And it just got a really noisy debate, so to speak. And I think what we forgot in
[Guest]: the process is that state capacity in India is weak. And there are many, many sectors of India
[Guest]: where things don't work. You take crime, you take anything, basically. Now in a country where the
[Guest]: state capacity is inherently weak, why would we expect a very complicated number like GDP to be
[Guest]: perfect? I mean, it's almost obvious that there will be problems, there will be measurement flaws,
[Guest]: and maybe people are trying to do the best that they can. But there are issues. But if you blow
[Guest]: it out of proportion saying, oh, no, it's not 7.5, but it's seven, then it really becomes problematic,
[Amit Varma]: unless you really understand what you're talking about.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a couple of questions here. One is the methodology and the data,
[Amit Varma]: are the methodology and the data that is used to calculate the GDP, are they open and available to
[Amit Varma]: all to kind of look at? And the second problem that strikes me thinking from a point of view
[Amit Varma]: of incentives is that if a lot of this data is coming from government agencies, and if it is
[Amit Varma]: obviously an incentive, I mean, the government is incentivized to make itself look good,
[Amit Varma]: then how can this data be reliable? And are there independent ways of either verifying this data,
[Amit Varma]: or using other proxies to get a sense of I mean, whether it causes a smell test?
[Guest]: Yeah. So what happened in 2015 was that there were many changes done to the GDP series other than
[Guest]: just a base year revision. For example, for the manufacturing sector, which underwent the biggest
[Guest]: changes, the entire data set that was used in the earlier series was replaced with a new data set.
[Guest]: And since I need to mention the name, otherwise, it'll be difficult. It's called MCA. It's the
[Guest]: Ministry of Corporate Affairs data set, MCA21 data. So earlier, we were using Annual Survey
[Guest]: of Industries, ASI, and now we started using MCA21 data. So it was a big change.
[Guest]: Then there were many other methodological changes in the way GDP was estimated in the new series.
[Guest]: Now, these data are not coming from the government agencies. For example,
[Guest]: MCA21 is a database where companies voluntarily file their financial returns,
[Guest]: and on the basis of the financial returns, you're computing the GDP of the manufacturing sector,
[Guest]: or of the services sector, basically. So many methodological data related changes were introduced.
[Guest]: And it's possible that some things went haywire in that. But unfortunately, we can't test it
[Guest]: because it's not publicly available. So as a researcher today, I cannot access the MCA21
[Guest]: database. So while I may suspect that there are some problems with it, I can't conclusively prove
[Guest]: that yes, there are problems because I don't get access to the database.
[Amit Varma]: Why don't you get access to the database? I mean, just using the same RTI principle,
[Amit Varma]: should not all citizens have access to these databases?
[Guest]: Yeah, if you file an RTI, so MCA21 data, let's say there are 11 lakh companies that register
[Guest]: with the Ministry of Company Affairs in any given year. Out of 11 lakh companies,
[Guest]: let's say six or seven lakh are filing returns. You basically need all their data.
[Guest]: And the MCA does not provide it publicly. You can pay a very small fee and get the data for
[Guest]: one company for one year. And it just becomes a mammoth exercise if you want to get the full
[Guest]: data set. So unless the MCA decides to make it publicly available in a user-friendly manner,
[Guest]: it is very difficult for us to get that data. And just getting the data itself is not the end
[Guest]: of the story, because you also need details of the methodological changes that the CSO
[Guest]: had brought about. We don't even know that. So when the CSO brought about all these changes,
[Guest]: there is a document which kind of gives an idea, but it's very vague. And there's a lot of opacity
[Guest]: about it, that what were the exact changes and other technical details. Now, if they had been
[Guest]: transparent about it, that listen, these are the changes that we did. This is the current method,
[Guest]: all the nitty-gritty and details of it. And here is the database that we used. Now you are free to
[Guest]: do whatever tests you want to do. They did not do that. So there's a lot of guessing game that
[Guest]: researchers had to do to figure out what's wrong. And that, I think, kind of got the CSO more on
[Guest]: the back foot. They got more defensive. And there was no release of information coming from their
[Guest]: side at all. So end of the day, there is this opacity. There is a big suspicion that things
[Guest]: have gone wrong. And there is absolutely no response from the CSO admitting that, yeah,
[Guest]: maybe there are some problems or you guys find it out for yourselves. We are making the documents
[Guest]: transparent. And that ended up this camp thing that, you know, I mean, some people are just
[Guest]: convinced that there are problems with the GDP data, the CSO. And now the government basically
[Guest]: says that, no, no, everything is fine. And you're almost at an impasse because what do you do? And
[Guest]: what ended up happening, the negative effect of that is that I think people started losing the
[Guest]: trust in GDP. When I talked to many of my financial market friends in Bombay, they tell me that
[Guest]: routinely when the GDP number comes out, they always subtract 2% from that number. And they
[Guest]: take that as the actual growth rate because they feel they can't trust the actual official number.
[Guest]: There's no reliability of it. I often tell my own students that, you know, you can work on macro
[Guest]: research, but you can't use the GDP data. Imagine what a handicap that is if you're studying the
[Guest]: macroeconomic situation of the country, but you can't use GDP data. Also, what happened with this
[Guest]: revision, we don't have a continuous series going backward. So we have a GDP data now from 2011-12,
[Guest]: but nothing going back to the 1950s. So when you don't have a continuous series, how do you
[Guest]: track the progress of the economy over time? So even that got affected. In fact, there was a,
[Guest]: typically what happens when you do a base year revision, you're also supposed to release a back
[Guest]: series to link it with the older one. And the CSO did that, except the back series showed that
[Guest]: during the boom period, what you and I know as the boom period of 2004-2008, the Indian growth
[Guest]: rate was lower than what it has been over the last five years. So you just change our perception of
[Amit Varma]: history. And there is a smell test issue to that, quite frankly, because you know, just having
[Amit Varma]: lived through that time and living through this time. Exactly. And I think with that release,
[Guest]: they actually lost all credibility, because when you just tell the country that, oh, it was not the
[Guest]: boom period that you thought it was, because we have changed things. And that also, they were
[Guest]: really opaque about the back series method, how they did it. I mean, we tried to recreate it,
[Guest]: and we could not because we just didn't have access to information. So all of these things,
[Guest]: it just was no longer just a base year revision or just a methodological improvement in keeping
[Guest]: with SNA. They started doing many, many things, which really affected the credibility of the
[Guest]: statistical office itself. And when that started happening, you know, you just, as I said, you
[Amit Varma]: don't trust the GDP number anymore. And, you know, typically, the first instinct would be that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, they changed the methodology a little bit and all, maybe they did it in good faith,
[Amit Varma]: and let's not bring politics into it and so on. But then when you say that they are not being
[Amit Varma]: transparent about it, and they're just asking us to trust them blindly, then I think the default
[Amit Varma]: mode has to be suspicion and to say that there is something fishy here.
[Guest]: Exactly. Because when you see that there are so many people criticizing it, some of them
[Guest]: know what they're talking about, some of them may not know, but still, all you had to do as the
[Guest]: statistical agency of the country is just come out in the open and say, listen, guys, this is
[Guest]: the details of what we have done. And yeah, maybe there are some problems here or there, maybe you
[Guest]: should have had some caviar, take it with a pinch of salt. But this is in the interest of the
[Guest]: economy, because we want to do a better capture, blah, blah, blah. But we are going to give you
[Guest]: all the information, there is no reason for them to withhold information from us.
[Guest]: I mean, they could literally crowdsource all the hard work.
[Guest]: Absolutely, absolutely. And you know, the quest should be to improve GDP estimation method,
[Guest]: and to involve more and more stakeholders. And it's extremely important, I think,
[Guest]: when it's a national statistic number, you need to buy in the trust of the stakeholders. Otherwise,
[Guest]: who are you really creating this number for? I mean, are you just creating the number in
[Guest]: because you want to participate in a global rat race of being the fastest growing country when
[Guest]: nobody in your country believes in the data? So what is it that the objective is? And especially
[Guest]: when you are in a country with such a rich history and heritage of statistics, then why would you do
[Guest]: something like that? Why can't you just be transparent and say, this is all that there is,
[Guest]: and you guys figure out if you really have the expertise. And I personally have not just been
[Guest]: able to understand what is the resistance and what what's the reason behind this opacity.
[Guest]: And if there is so much of a criticism, instead of being defensive and saying,
[Guest]: no, no, it's an attack, and blah, blah, blah, everything is well, and doing more stuff like
[Guest]: releasing a back series, which says the boom period was not a boom period. Why would you do
[Guest]: something like that? Right? I mean, unless you were really convinced, which I don't think they
[Guest]: were, because, again, that method document was also opaque. I just don't get the motive that,
[Guest]: you know, you're a statistical agency, all you do, like all statistical agencies in all countries is
[Guest]: you follow a method, you try to improve, you come up with a number, it's a statistical process.
[Guest]: But what's this obsession with defending a number, instead of just saying, this is what it is,
[Guest]: this is a method, this is the data, figure it out for yourself.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask a very, I mean, forgive me if this is too much of a newbie question.
[Amit Varma]: I get why the state needs to know what the GDP is, because it's doing whatever economic planning it
[Amit Varma]: is doing, though there could be an argument, it should do much less of it and just do the
[Amit Varma]: basic things that it's supposed to do, like maintain the rule of law. And I get why political
[Amit Varma]: parties need to know the GDP, because they want to make it part of their campaigns and the government
[Amit Varma]: needs it for the optics of we are doing such a good job, the opposition needs it for the opposite
[Amit Varma]: reason. But why do you and I, why do people in the actual regular participants in the actual
[Amit Varma]: regular economy need to know what the GDP is? Why is it important?
[Guest]: So the answer to that question is we don't need to know. You know, I mean, your life or my life,
[Guest]: we won't be any worse off and nothing will be taken away from our life if we don't know how
[Guest]: Indian GDP growth is doing. I mean, if I come to think of it before the internet age,
[Guest]: did people really know about how India is doing and what's the growth rate? No. I mean, because
[Guest]: I think because of the internet age, because communication has become such a commodity today,
[Guest]: that everybody starts taking interest in this one number in this GDP growth without even thinking
[Guest]: why do we need to bother about it? I mean, it's another thing that newspapers are or media or
[Guest]: whatever, they discuss it, because they want to question the government, which is perfectly fine
[Guest]: in good faith. But is it really necessary to take the debate to this extent and make such a big deal
[Guest]: of it? I don't think so. I think if there are economists or statisticians who know what they're
[Guest]: talking about, and they are questioning the statistical agency, it should just remain between
[Guest]: them. And end of the day, we should not give so much importance to GDP. I think what has happened
[Guest]: over the last five years is we have given excessive importance to a number which is produced
[Guest]: in a weak state capacity environment, and attempt to be consistent with international guidelines.
[Guest]: But we have just given it this holy grail notion, or in other words, we have basically made a cult
[Guest]: out of GDP. And therefore, the entire debate policy discussion just rotates around that number.
[Guest]: It really doesn't have to be that exactly as you said, your life, my life doesn't change at all,
[Guest]: if you don't know how the country is doing, and it's perfectly fine. But I think the debate should
[Guest]: remain within the people who know what they're talking about, and should not become this popular
[Guest]: debate. Because it is really a very complicated concept. And I would much rather it stays so,
[Guest]: because otherwise, we end up assigning too much importance to an obscure, artificial number. And
[Guest]: then you just lose the narrative, because then the focus is not on fixing the problems,
[Guest]: the focus is defending, saying no, no, no, everything is fine. The focus all throughout
[Guest]: the last four years should have been either acknowledging that there are some issues,
[Guest]: fixing the problems, and all that the public gets to know is, yeah, the number has changed,
[Guest]: and some other number has come out. So what big deal.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, as we discussed earlier, it's a very nebulous number, like another
[Amit Varma]: measure of that, which I was hearing about recently is that, you know, the states all
[Amit Varma]: measure their own GDP as well. And when you put them all together, it doesn't add up to what the
[Amit Varma]: India GDP is. Or if you measure the India GDP, you know, through a different approach, you said
[Amit Varma]: there are three approaches, production, expenditure, so on, even those don't add up to each other. So
[Amit Varma]: it's a very nebulous number. And we need to recognize that. But also the counter view to
[Amit Varma]: that which strikes me is that in a democracy, especially a democracy, which you could argue
[Amit Varma]: is going through turbulent times as ours might be, in a democracy, you need to hold you need to speak
[Amit Varma]: truth to power, and you need to hold it accountable. And you need a metric for that to judge
[Amit Varma]: how it is performing. For example, you know, it is plain common sense. And we see it all around
[Amit Varma]: us that demonetization was an absolute disaster. But if they are throwing a GDP number at us,
[Amit Varma]: which doesn't really indicate that you need a way to fight that and argue that and which is why
[Amit Varma]: the counter view to this whole thing of you know, that GDP should not be a political issue
[Amit Varma]: would be that because it is the metric out there of our government is performing in an economic
[Guest]: context, it has to be a political issue. So the two ways to address what you're saying,
[Guest]: and I completely agree with what you're saying to see, it's like, think of an example where if
[Guest]: you tell students in a school or university that all that matters is your rank in class and your
[Guest]: grades, and nothing else, then the students will try by hook or by crook by cheating by gaming,
[Guest]: whatever it is, to get the high rank and to get get up the grades, which is exactly what countries
[Guest]: are doing today. I mean, countries like ours or other countries that all that matters is the
[Guest]: number and the growth rate and we will try to do whatever it takes. We'll game the system and get
[Guest]: the growth rate up. There is a saying that if you can measure something, you can control it.
[Guest]: So that's exactly what governments and it's not just our government, whatever, not government,
[Guest]: but our country. It is happening in Greece, in Argentina, many, many other countries.
[Guest]: But the thing is, if you want to hold the government or the system accountable on the
[Guest]: basis of one number, that majority of the people don't even understand, then I think it's a very
[Guest]: problematic scenario. I would much rather say that, and especially when it doesn't affect your
[Guest]: day to day life. I mean, look at it this way, demonetization happened. Did anything show in
[Guest]: the GDP? No. Is it just a function of flawed methodology or is it the case that really
[Guest]: nothing happened? We don't know. So that metric itself is not a perfect measure of what you want
[Guest]: to measure. And in a flawed metric, which is complicated and all of that, would you want to
[Guest]: use that to hold the government accountable? As opposed to, let's say, for example, is jobs a
[Guest]: better metric? Because jobs is something that does affect you and I. Today you and I would care about
[Guest]: the fact, do we have a job? Do we have an income? That's something that immediately affects us.
[Guest]: I would much rather be in a situation where I can hold the government accountable for the jobs,
[Guest]: or not just the government, even the markets, whoever it is, right? That if the unemployment
[Guest]: rate, or I call the non-employment rate, because non-employment also measures people who are not
[Guest]: even looking for jobs. The situation has become so desperate that you're not even out there searching
[Guest]: for a job. So I would much rather that that kind of a measure, that kind of a metric for an emerging
[Guest]: country like India, is perhaps much more important. And it's relatively harder to fudge because people
[Guest]: in their day-to-day lives can observe whether they have jobs or not. And we do an extremely
[Guest]: poor measure of unemployment rate. I think there should have been a lot more discussion about
[Guest]: improving unemployment or non-employment measures, as opposed to improving GDP measures,
[Guest]: because it's a very, very abstract notion as opposed to jobs. But you'll see there's not much
[Guest]: of a, other than the government withdrawing, not basically withholding that report, we don't see
[Guest]: a lot of discussion in general about jobs and unemployment. It has become a recent fashion
[Guest]: because of this withdrawal of the report and the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy coming up
[Guest]: with very high unemployment numbers. I think that needs a lot more focus. And if people really want
[Guest]: to question something and really want to hold the government accountable for something, maybe that's
[Guest]: that's it. Otherwise, I think if you pay too much emphasis on this one GDP number, it is very easy
[Guest]: for the statistical agency to say, oh, we have done everything right. And what can you do after
[Guest]: that? As I said, we are at an impasse. You know, it's been four years since the series came out.
[Guest]: Have we achieved anything by holding the government accountable? Nothing. In fact,
[Guest]: they are just doing more egregious things, like, as I said, releasing a back series and all of
[Guest]: those things. Maybe we'll have another base year revision coming up, which can increase the growth
[Guest]: rate even more. What can we really do? I mean, despite the noise that that has been created,
[Guest]: the statistical agencies say, oh, we are perfect. We are following the international standards.
[Guest]: This is the rate at which the economy is growing, as opposed to saying, let's get down to measuring
[Guest]: unemployment or the job situation, because you look around and you see your friends don't have
[Guest]: jobs. The salaries are not increasing commensurately with the growth or whatever inflation
[Guest]: it is. That's something or not just jobs. Look at multiple things. Again, instead of holding the
[Guest]: government accountable for one thing, you hold the government accountable for a few other things.
[Guest]: If you want to talk about welfare, should India just measure its performance in terms of GDP
[Guest]: growth? We may be the fastest growing country in the world, but we do so poorly in all the
[Amit Varma]: other metrics of development, environment, climate change, etc. Like one of the alternative metrics,
[Amit Varma]: which came up a couple of decades ago is the HDI, the Human Development Index, where again,
[Amit Varma]: we don't do so well. And many economists have proposed that you don't look at the GDP,
[Amit Varma]: you have a dashboard of metrics. And you know, you were speaking earlier of common sense metrics.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember Donald Reagan's 1984 political campaign, where he basically asked the American
[Amit Varma]: people to ask themselves one question, am I better off now than I was four years ago,
[Amit Varma]: because he was fighting for re-election. And the thing is, if you ask the Indian voter for that,
[Amit Varma]: that's a very nebulous question. Because number one, he may feel more at ease with a particular
[Amit Varma]: sort of cultural narrative, even if he is not physically better off. Secondly, and this is
[Amit Varma]: an objection which permeates through every single metric, what are the counterfactuals?
[Amit Varma]: You know, if the labor laws were reformed, would he be much better off? That is just such a,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I mean, how on earth do you measure something like that? You simply don't know the
[Amit Varma]: counterfactuals. And that could really apply to, you know, any of all this. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: when it comes to something like the GDP, which is such a complicated number, like you put it,
[Amit Varma]: essentially, I think what is going to happen is people are going to believe what they want to
[Amit Varma]: believe, they're going to go with the narrative they want to believe, it's essentially going to
[Amit Varma]: be tribal, where someone who supports the Prime Minister Modi will say, oh, the GDP is doing great
[Amit Varma]: and the other side will say it's not. And it's ultimately a tribal decision and not a rational,
[Amit Varma]: mathematical one. So my question to you now turning away from all of this, turning away from
[Amit Varma]: the politicization of GDP and all of that, is that as an economist, and in your case, as an economist
[Amit Varma]: who's written a lot on the GDP, and, you know, you are a sort of an expert on it, how do you now look
[Amit Varma]: at where we are today? Like, if it's a completely useless metric, how do we move forward from here?
[Amit Varma]: Is there any way past this? Or is it just basically, you know, given that the methodology is
[Amit Varma]: now opaque, and given what the incentives are, is it just a completely nonsense figure, which you
[Guest]: have to ignore as an economist? That's, that's exactly the question that I've been grappling
[Guest]: with Amit for the last several, several months, if not a couple of years, is that as an economist,
[Guest]: and especially as a macroeconomist, where my bread and butter, or my passion, so to speak,
[Guest]: it depends a lot on using GDP as a statistic, because I'm an applied economist, is what do I
[Guest]: do? What research do I do? Where do we go from here? And I have come to the conclusion myself
[Guest]: that we cannot use the GDP number in our research, in our policy debates, in public discussions,
[Guest]: because simply, A, B, or at least I, from whatever research I have done shows there are problems.
[Guest]: And it's very difficult to trust that number unless the problems get fixed, or unless the
[Guest]: statistical agency openly comes out about the caveats and qualifications. It is very hard. And
[Guest]: where do we go from here? I would say, as you pointed out, dashboard of indicators that I think
[Guest]: people are already looking at a bunch of indicators to get a sense of how the economy is doing.
[Amit Varma]: The thing is, even those can be gamed eventually.
[Guest]: Those can be gamed. But essentially, at that point, you just have to say that,
[Guest]: you know, we are at a situation where we can't get a sense of how the economy is doing.
[Guest]: I mean, the extreme pessimistic scenario, I would say, if you ask me how the Indian economy is
[Guest]: doing, my answer would be as an economist, I don't know, because I have no way of measuring
[Guest]: and assessing the performance. If I can't trust the national number, that's GDP. And if some of
[Guest]: the indicators are also extremely volatile, because they fluctuate a lot. I have basically
[Amit Varma]: no way of... And your point is that because the data which goes into all of this is so complicated,
[Amit Varma]: it's really not possible for independent economists to sit down and come up with their
[Guest]: own number. I mean, basically, a lot of attempts can be made using disaggregated information. So
[Guest]: for example, if you collect household level data, or if you collect firm level data,
[Guest]: you can assess sector wise performance. So you can get a sense of how the corporate India is
[Guest]: performing, you can get a sense of how households are consuming, saving, etc. You can get a
[Guest]: disaggregated picture. And then maybe you can just try to put things together in your mind and say,
[Guest]: okay, this is roughly what the economy is doing. But it's very, very difficult to get a comprehensive
[Guest]: view saying, oh, is economy is in a, what we call technically a recession, or an expansion meaning
[Guest]: is it is it slowing down? Or is it accelerating? It's just very hard to say at this point of time.
[Guest]: So I would say going forward, it's, it's a dark phase for, especially macroeconomists, you have
[Guest]: to basically bank on non GDP, non performance related stuff. And you can't say anything about
[Amit Varma]: the performance of the country. Can't. That's horrendously sad and depressing.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, you know, before we end the episode, let's kind of take a step back out of India and go back
[Amit Varma]: to the overall concept of the GDP per se. And again, it seems to me that just as a measure of
[Amit Varma]: progress is very inadequate. You know, there's the example of the 1836, the world's richest guy dies
[Amit Varma]: because he doesn't have an antibiotic. Just looking at my own life, you know, like when I was
[Amit Varma]: growing up in the 80s and early 90s, you know, we had so little access to music, I remember how much
[Amit Varma]: I would feel enriched if I managed to get together a mixtape from somewhere of music that was
[Amit Varma]: otherwise not available in India. And today we can go to Amazon Prime or Google Play or Spotify and
[Amit Varma]: press play and everything in the world is available to us. And we are hardly paying anything for it.
[Amit Varma]: And the value that has been added to my life by technology in the last 20 years cannot possibly
[Amit Varma]: be calculated. And none of it is because of the bloody status despite the state. You know, so
[Guest]: if I can interrupt there. So one question, and again, I don't know the right answer to this,
[Guest]: but it's something that I am questioning myself that how much do we really need to measure these
[Guest]: things? Exactly. I mean, in the sense, yeah, there are many intrinsic implicit improvements happening
[Guest]: in my life because of the day and age, because of access to better quality products and better
[Guest]: quality services. But do we really need to measure all of these in an aggregative number? Or do we
[Guest]: not? I mean, are we just are we just satisfied with saying, okay, there is this part of the economy
[Guest]: that we can measure goods and services, physical, whatever it is, and we just start satisfied with
[Guest]: that number, because it gives some idea of where the economy is going. You know, there's a saying
[Guest]: that it is very hard to feed the soul when your stomach is empty. So there is some value in having
[Guest]: that physical or whatever this GDP notion as well, if properly measured to show how the economy is
[Guest]: performing over time. And yeah, there are shortcomings environmental where all of these
[Guest]: things that that we have discussed, but maybe you come up with other measures, you know, there is a
[Guest]: Human Development Index, where you can at least measure some life expectancy or literacy rate,
[Guest]: or you figure out which cities are worth living in, you know, all of these rankings that come up
[Guest]: with multiple, multiple things with their own flaws, etc. But do you really need a comprehensive
[Guest]: measure of quality of life? Is it really necessary? I'm not so sure at this point of time, it's just
[Guest]: that it's so difficult to measure. And something which is difficult to measure, do you really want
[Guest]: to put resources of a state which is already struggling with weak state capacity? Do you
[Guest]: really want to put the resources to do something like that? I'm not so sure. Or is it that the case
[Guest]: that countries like the US, Australia, Canada, which have already achieved a very high per capita
[Guest]: level of income, they should stop worrying about GDP growth, because they've already achieved that
[Guest]: level. And they have the luxury of now coming up with all of these other things. And at some point
[Guest]: of time, when we have crossed all our major obstacles, then maybe we can figure out whether
[Guest]: we can do that or not. Again, these are just questions, I don't have the right answers. But
[Guest]: it's worth also asking ourselves, how much I'm all for economic measurement. But how much do you
[Guest]: really want to measure, knowing that all the measurements will be perfect? These are very wise
[Amit Varma]: words. So basically, what you're saying, correct me if I'm wrong, is that the GDP is a very flawed
[Amit Varma]: measure. And while we can tweak it and do this and that, there's really no need to look for a
[Amit Varma]: better measure than that. Because why measure all of these things, just go to Google Play,
[Amit Varma]: press play, enjoy the music, right? That's absolutely the thing. I shouldn't have said
[Amit Varma]: that because I don't even sponsor it. And it's like a random plug that I'm giving, go to Amazon
[Guest]: Prime. Yeah, sometimes I think we should just, you know, as I said, relax a little bit, not
[Guest]: overthink, not overthink it. As I said, I keep saying the same thing. You have weak state capacity
[Guest]: do not attach so much importance to a number that is coming out of the state agencies.
[Guest]: It is what it is. Yeah, there are debates that economists and statisticians will do it.
[Guest]: But do the common public really need to get so involved in it when they don't even understand
[Guest]: what it is and it doesn't affect their daily life? Perhaps not. So I think if the debate
[Guest]: gets a little bit more confined and the emphasis is put on fixing things and improving things
[Guest]: and moving on, it will probably be better rather than sensationalizing it. And as far as alternative
[Guest]: measures are concerned, I think this debate is going to be continuing because it's coming up
[Guest]: from the developed countries and anything that starts in the developed countries will continue
[Guest]: for a very long time. So I think till they figure out in their peace of mind, what are the alternative
[Guest]: measures or what are the supplementary measures? It's too premature for us to get into that debate
[Amit Varma]: because we haven't even fixed our main basic thing. Rajeshwari, I understand GDP so much
[Amit Varma]: better now that I've spoken to you. Thanks so much for coming on the show. Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure. If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Rajeshwari on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at wait a minute, you can't she's not on Twitter. And that's a secret of a wild productivity. I,
[Amit Varma]: however, am not nearly as productive. You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in, thinkpragati.com and
[Amit Varma]: ivmpodcast.com. The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution,
[Amit Varma]: an independent center for research in education and public policy. Takshashila offers 12-week
[Amit Varma]: courses in public policy, technology policy and strategic studies for both full-time students
[Unknown]: and working professionals. Visit takshashila.org.in for more details. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai
[Unknown]: Hi, my name is Anupam Gupta. I'm B-50 on Twitter. I am the host of Pesa Pesa,
[Unknown]: the show that talks money. On my show, I speak to experts from every field of money and finance,
[Unknown]: from stock markets, equities, debt funds, credit cards, life insurance,
[Unknown]: every possible area of money and finance that you can think of. We even did an episode on
[Unknown]: cryptocurrency. I've got fantastic guests from mutual funds to personal finance experts everywhere,
[Unknown]: robo-admin startups, just name it, we've got it. At Pesa Pesa, we help you make smart decisions
[Unknown]: about money. You work hard for money, now make your money work hard for you. New episodes out
[Unknown]: every Monday and you can listen to my show on the IVM podcast app or any other podcasting
[Unknown]: app that you have. Pesa Pesa is brought to you by Paytm Money.